README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# ExprCompareR

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

Statistical comparison and visualization of transcript-protein
relationships.

## Description

`ExprCompareR` is an R package designed to streamline the exploration
and quantification of the relationship between RNA expression and
protein expression across human tissues and conditions. Researchers
studying post-transcriptional regulation currently face the
time-consuming task of manually retrieving RNA-seq and
protein-expression data, filtering, normalizing, computing correlations,
and creating visualizations for their genes of interest. `ExprCompareR`
automates and integrates these steps, providing a user-friendly workflow
to quickly retrieve transcriptomic and proteomic data from public
repositories such as the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project
(GTEx)(Lonsdale et al., 2013) and the Human Protein Atlas (HPA)(Thul et
al., 2018), compute correlations, flag outlier genes, and visualize
results. The package also facilitates the comparison of protein
expression between diseased and healthy tissues, offering
tissue-specific insights and statistical analyses. Unlike existing tools
that focus on either RNA or protein expression alone, `ExprCompareR`
enables direct comparisons between RNA and protein levels, making it a
novel and valuable resource for bioinformatics researchers,
computational scientists, and students interested in tissue-specific
expression, post-transcriptional regulation, or biomarker discovery.

`ExprCompareR` was developed using:

R version: 4.4.2 (2024-10-31 ucrt)

Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64

Running under: Windows 11 x64 (build 26100)

## Installation

To install the latest version of the ExprCompareR package:

``` r
install.packages("devtools")
library(devtools)

devtools::install_github("tanaya2026/ExprCompareR", build_vignettes = TRUE)

library(ExprCompareR)

```

To run the shiny app:

``` r
runExprCompareR()
```

<br> **Note:** Before running the Shiny app, make sure **ALL** your R
packages are up to date. If RStudio prompts you to update packages
during **installation**, click Yes. Running the app without updating
packages may cause errors. <br>

## Overview

``` r
library("ExprCompareR")
ls("package:ExprCompareR")
data(package = "ExprCompareR") 
browseVignettes("ExprCompareR")
```

`ExprCompareR` contains five main user-accessible functions:

1.  ***compute_correlation*** - Computes spearman correlations across a
    set of genes **or** tissues of interest returns a plot summarizing
    the results. `compute_correlation` acts as a wrapper function and
    depending on the input, it calls either `correlation_genes_only()`
    or `correlation_tissues_only()` internally.
2.  ***correlation_genes_tissues*** - Computes spearman correlations
    across a set of genes **and** tissues of interest returns a plot
    summarizing the results. Users can choose to visualize per gene or
    per tissue. `correlation_genes_tissues` acts as a wrapper function
    and depending on the input, it calls either `per_gene_plot()` or
    `per_tissue_plot()` internally.
3.  ***detect_outliers*** – Identifies genes in a given tissue that show
    large differences between RNA and protein expression and highlights
    them in a plot.
4.  ***compareCancerProtein*** – Compares protein expression between
    normal and cancer tissues for a specified cancer type, providing a
    summary table and bar plot of rank changes.
5.  ***runExprCompareR*** - Launches the Shiny app for ExprCompareR.

The package has prebuilt datasets like `normal_tissue` and `pathology`,
to avoid dynamically downloading the protein expression datasets each
time. Refer to `help` documentation for information on data.

An overview of the package is illustrated below:

**Image 1:** Depicts the functionality of functions
`compute_correlation`, `correlation_genes_tissues`, `detect_outliers`,
and `compareCancerProtein`.

![](./inst/extdata/ExprCompareR_Overview.png) <br>

## Contributions

The author of the package is Tanaya Datar. ExprCompareR contains 4 main
functions and 3 helper functions. The idea, execution, and code
structure for all functions was done by the author. All of our functions
depend on protein expression and RNA-seq data that is queried using
packages HPAanalyze(Tran et al., 2019) and gtexr’s(Warwick et al., 2025)
built in functions, that query the GTEx (Lonsdale et al., 2013) and HPA
(Thul et al., 2018) databases for specific tissues and genes depending
on the user input. Specifically we used `hpadownload` from
HPAanalyze(Tran et al., 2019) to query protein expression data and
`get_top_expressed_genes` `get_gene_expression` from gtexr (Warwick et
al., 2025) to query RNA seq data. Additionally, package `dplyr` (Wickham
et al., 2025)’s `filter`, `pull`, `group_by`, `summarise`, `mutate`,
`select` functions was used in all four
functions(compute_correlation,correlation_genes_tissues,
detect_outliers, compareCancerProtein)to filter and structure RNA and
protein data that was queried, to perform analysis. Package `tidyr`
(Wickham et al., 2025) `drop_na` function was used to drop NA values in
`outlier_detection` `compute_correlation`. Package `tibble`(Muller K,
Wickham H, 2025)`tibble` function was used to generate tibbles for
analysis in `correlation_genes_tissues`. Package `purr` (Wickham et al.,
2025) `map_dbl` and `map` function was used to map RNA and protein
expression for each gene in `correlation_genes_tissues`. Package
`stats`(R Core Team, 2024) and `utils` (R Core Team, 2024) `quantile`,
`reorder` and `utils` were used to filter data for analysis. Package
`ggplot2` (Wickham H, 2016)’s `ggplot` function was used to create
scatter plots in `outlier_detection`, bar plots in `compute_correlation`
and `correlation_genes_tissues`, and directional plots in
`compareCancerProtein` for visualization. Package `ggrepel`(Slowikowski
K, 2024)’s function `geom_text_repel` was used in `outlier_detection` to
prevent overlapping labels.

Additionally BioRender(BioRender.com. BioRender \[Online\], accessed 2
November 2025), was used to generate the images used in the Overview
Section of the README.

ChatGPT was used across the functions to debug errors and to refine the
wording used in the roxygen tags. ChatGPT was also used to resolve the
errors that were caught during unit tests. Other than this, generative
AI was NOT used for core code/ideas/problem solving, and all other work
was done by the author.

## References

- BioRender.com. BioRender \[Online\]. Available at:
  <https://www.biorender.com> (accessed 2 November 2025).

- Cetinkaya-Rundel M,Cheng J, Grolemund G (2017).Customize your UI with
  HTML. <https://shiny.posit.co/r/articles/build/html-tags/>

- Chang W, Cheng J, Allaire J, Sievert C, Schloerke B, Aden-Buie G, Xie
  Y, Allen J, McPherson J, Dipert A, Borges B (2025). shiny: Web
  Application Framework for R. R package version 1.11.1,
  <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=shiny>

- Lonsdale, J., Thomas, J., Salvatore, M. et al. The Genotype-Tissue
  Expression (GTEx) project. Nat Genet 45, 580–585 (2013).
  <https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2653>

- Müller K, Wickham H (2025). tibble: Simple Data Frames. R package
  version 3.3.0, <https://tibble.tidyverse.org/>.

- OpenAI.(2025). ChatGPT (GPT-5) \[Large language model\]. Retrieved
  November 2, 2025, from <https://chatgpt.com/>

- R Core Team (2024). *R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
  Computing*. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
  <https://www.R-project.org/>.

- Silva, A., S. J. Rothstein, P. D. McNicholas, and S. Subedi (2019). A
  multivariate Poisson-log normal mixture model for clustering
  transcriptome sequencing data.BMC Bioinformatics. 2019;20(1):394.
  <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31311497/>

- Slowikowski K (2024). ggrepel: Automatically Position Non-Overlapping
  Text Labels with ‘ggplot2’.
  <https://ggrepel.slowkow.com/,https://github.com/slowkow/ggrepel>.

- Thul, P. J., & Lindskog, C. (2018). The human protein atlas: A spatial
  map of the human proteome. Protein science : a publication of the
  Protein Society, 27(1), 233–244. <https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.3307>

- Tran AN, Dussaq AM, Kennell Jr T, Willey CD, Hjelmeland AB (2019).
  “HPAanalyze: an R package that facilitates the retrieval and analysis
  of the Human Protein Atlas data.” MC Bioinformatics 20, 463 (2019).
  <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-3059-z>

- Warwick A, Zuckerman B, Ung C, Luben R, Olvera-Barrios A (2025).
  “gtexr: A convenient R interface to the Genotype-Tissue Expression
  (GTEx) Portal API.” Journal of Open Source Software, 10(109), 8249.
  ISSN 2475-9066, <doi:10.21105/joss.08249>, gigs v0.2.1.

- Wickham H (2016). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis.
  Springer-Verlag New York. ISBN 978-3 319-24277-4,
  <https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org>.

- Wickham H, François R, Henry L, Müller K, Vaughan D (2025). dplyr: A
  Grammar of Data Manipulation. R package version 1.1.4,
  <https://dplyr.tidyverse.org>.

- Wickham H, Henry L (2025). purrr: Functional Programming Tools. R
  package version 1.1.0, <https://purrr.tidyverse.org/>.

- Wickham H, Vaughan D, Girlich M (2025). tidyr: Tidy Messy Data. R
  package version 1.3.1, <https://tidyr.tidyverse.org>.

## Acknowledgements

This package was developed as part of an assessment for 2025 BCB410H:
Applied Bioinformatics course at the University of Toronto, Toronto,
CANADA. `ExprCompareR` welcomes issues, enhancement requests, and other
contributions. To submit an issue, use the GitHub issues.

## Other topics

- ExprCompareR analyzes two types of biological data: RNA-expression
  data and protein expression data. This data is queried from
  established databases, namely the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project
  (GTEx)(Lonsdale et al., 2013) and Human Protein Atlas (HPA)(Thul et
  al., 2018).

- The RNA-expression data from GTEx has been derived from GTEx healthy
  donors and measures the amount of mRNA produced by each gene in
  various tissues. This data is available in Transcripts Per Million
  (TPM), and organized in tabular form, where the rows depict the gene
  expression, while the columns are tissue type, gene name, gene
  expression, etc. (Lonsdale et al., 2013)

- The protein-expression data from Human Protein Atlas, has been derived
  from HPA healthy and diseases tissue samples, and measures the
  abundance of proteins in various tissues, and is organized in a
  tabular form, having columns such as gene, tissue, level, reliability
  etc. This has been measured by techniques like immunohistochemistry
  and mass spectrometry (Thul et al., 2018).

- ***LIMITATIONS***: As the transcriptomic data and proteomic data come
  from different sources and different individuals, technical and
  biological variation can cause limitations in our package. However,
  our package transforms and normalizes data to achieve a fair
  comparison.

- The targeted audience for `ExprCompareR` are bioinformatics
  researchers, computational scientists or even students who are
  interested in exploring the relationship between gene expression at
  RNA and protein levels. Specifically, this package is designed for
  users who are interested in finding candidates for
  post-transcriptional regulation or studying tissue-specific RNA and
  protein expression or even biomarker discovery. Additionally, as
  `ExprCompareR` provides statistical/correlation analysis of RNA-seq
  and protein expression data sets as well as visualization tools, it
  can cater to users who are interested in utilizing these aspects as
  well.

- ExprCompareR is a combination of two words: Expression and Compare as
  the package deals with comparing RNA-seq expression and protein
  expression data.

## Package Structure

The package tree structure is provided below.

``` r
- ExprCompareR
  |- ExprCompareR.Rproj
  |- DESCRIPTION
  |- NAMESPACE
  |- LICENSE
  |- NEWS
  |- README
  |- data
    |- cancer_tissue_map.rda
    |- gene_symbols_list.rda
    |- normal_tissue.rda
    |- tissue_list_RNA.rda
    |- tissue_list_protein.rda
    |- tissue_map.rda
  |- inst
    CITATION
    |- extdata
      |- ExprCompareR_Overview.png
    |- shiny-scripts 
        |- app.R
        |- modules
          |- module-cancer_protein.R
          |- module-compute_correlation.R
          |- module-correlation_genes_tissues.R
          |- module-outlier.R
  |- man
    |- ExprCompareR.Rd
    |- cancer_tissue_map.Rd
    |- compareCancerProtein.Rd
    |- compute_correlation.Rd
    |- convert_to_gtex.Rd
    |- correlation_genes_only.Rd
    |- correlation_genes_tissues.Rd
    |- correlation_tissues_only.Rd
    |- detect_outliers.Rd
    |- gene_symbols_list.Rd
    |- get_gtex_gencode_ids.Rd
    |- normal_tissue.Rd
    |- pathology.Rd
    |- per_gene_plot.Rd
    |- per_tissue_plot.Rd
    |- protein_expr_values.Rd
    |- runExprCompareR.Rd
    |- tissue_list_RNA.Rd
    |- tissue_list_protein.Rd
    |- tissue_map.Rd
  |- R
    |- data.R
    |- ExprCompareR.R
    |- Helpers.R
    |- Outlier_Detection.R
    |- runExprCompareR.R
    |- Correlation.R
    |- CancerProtein.R
  |- vignettes
    |- Introduction_TestPackage.rmd
    |- images
      |- both_per_gene.png
      |- both_per_tissue.png
      |- outlier_detection.png
      |- pathology.png
      |- per_gene_only.png
      |- per_tissue_only.png
      |- ExprCompareR_Overview.png
  |- tests
    |- testthat.R
    |- testthat
      |- test-helpers.R
      |- test-outlier.R
      |- test-correlation.R
      |- test-cancer-protein.R
```

Commit message:

Added assumptions and similar packages to other topics

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# ExprCompareR

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

Statistical comparison and visualization of transcript-protein
relationships.

## Description

`ExprCompareR` is an R package designed to streamline the exploration
and quantification of the relationship between RNA expression and
protein expression across human tissues and conditions. Researchers
studying post-transcriptional regulation currently face the
time-consuming task of manually retrieving RNA-seq and
protein-expression data, filtering, normalizing, computing correlations,
and creating visualizations for their genes of interest. `ExprCompareR`
automates and integrates these steps, providing a user-friendly workflow
to quickly retrieve transcriptomic and proteomic data from public
repositories such as the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project
(GTEx)(Lonsdale et al., 2013) and the Human Protein Atlas (HPA)(Thul et
al., 2018), compute correlations, flag outlier genes, and visualize
results. The package also facilitates the comparison of protein
expression between diseased and healthy tissues, offering
tissue-specific insights and statistical analyses. Unlike existing tools
that focus on either RNA or protein expression alone, `ExprCompareR`
enables direct comparisons between RNA and protein levels, making it a
novel and valuable resource for bioinformatics researchers,
computational scientists, and students interested in tissue-specific
expression, post-transcriptional regulation, or biomarker discovery.

`ExprCompareR` was developed using:

R version: 4.4.2 (2024-10-31 ucrt)

Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64

Running under: Windows 11 x64 (build 26100)

## Installation

To install the latest version of the ExprCompareR package:

``` r
install.packages("devtools")
library(devtools)

devtools::install_github("tanaya2026/ExprCompareR", build_vignettes = TRUE)

library(ExprCompareR)

```

To run the shiny app:

``` r
runExprCompareR()
```

<br> **Note:** Before running the Shiny app, make sure **ALL** your R
packages are up to date. If RStudio prompts you to update packages
during **installation**, click Yes. Running the app without updating
packages may cause errors. <br>

## Overview

``` r
library("ExprCompareR")
ls("package:ExprCompareR")
data(package = "ExprCompareR") 
browseVignettes("ExprCompareR")
```

`ExprCompareR` contains five main user-accessible functions:

1.  ***compute_correlation*** - Computes spearman correlations across a
    set of genes **or** tissues of interest returns a plot summarizing
    the results. `compute_correlation` acts as a wrapper function and
    depending on the input, it calls either `correlation_genes_only()`
    or `correlation_tissues_only()` internally.
2.  ***correlation_genes_tissues*** - Computes spearman correlations
    across a set of genes **and** tissues of interest returns a plot
    summarizing the results. Users can choose to visualize per gene or
    per tissue. `correlation_genes_tissues` acts as a wrapper function
    and depending on the input, it calls either `per_gene_plot()` or
    `per_tissue_plot()` internally.
3.  ***detect_outliers*** – Identifies genes in a given tissue that show
    large differences between RNA and protein expression and highlights
    them in a plot.
4.  ***compareCancerProtein*** – Compares protein expression between
    normal and cancer tissues for a specified cancer type, providing a
    summary table and bar plot of rank changes.
5.  ***runExprCompareR*** - Launches the Shiny app for ExprCompareR.

The package has prebuilt datasets like `normal_tissue` and `pathology`,
to avoid dynamically downloading the protein expression datasets each
time. Refer to `help` documentation for information on data.

An overview of the package is illustrated below:

**Image 1:** Depicts the functionality of functions
`compute_correlation`, `correlation_genes_tissues`, `detect_outliers`,
and `compareCancerProtein`.

![](./inst/extdata/ExprCompareR_Overview.png) <br>

## Contributions

The author of the package is Tanaya Datar. ExprCompareR contains 4 main
functions and 3 helper functions. The idea, execution, and code
structure for all functions was done by the author. All of our functions
depend on protein expression and RNA-seq data that is queried using
packages HPAanalyze(Tran et al., 2019) and gtexr’s(Warwick et al., 2025)
built in functions, that query the GTEx (Lonsdale et al., 2013) and HPA
(Thul et al., 2018) databases for specific tissues and genes depending
on the user input. Specifically we used `hpadownload` from
HPAanalyze(Tran et al., 2019) to query protein expression data and
`get_top_expressed_genes` `get_gene_expression` from gtexr (Warwick et
al., 2025) to query RNA seq data. Additionally, package `dplyr` (Wickham
et al., 2025)’s `filter`, `pull`, `group_by`, `summarise`, `mutate`,
`select` functions was used in all four
functions(compute_correlation,correlation_genes_tissues,
detect_outliers, compareCancerProtein)to filter and structure RNA and
protein data that was queried, to perform analysis. Package `tidyr`
(Wickham et al., 2025) `drop_na` function was used to drop NA values in
`outlier_detection` `compute_correlation`. Package `tibble`(Muller K,
Wickham H, 2025)`tibble` function was used to generate tibbles for
analysis in `correlation_genes_tissues`. Package `purr` (Wickham et al.,
2025) `map_dbl` and `map` function was used to map RNA and protein
expression for each gene in `correlation_genes_tissues`. Package
`stats`(R Core Team, 2024) and `utils` (R Core Team, 2024) `quantile`,
`reorder` and `utils` were used to filter data for analysis. Package
`ggplot2` (Wickham H, 2016)’s `ggplot` function was used to create
scatter plots in `outlier_detection`, bar plots in `compute_correlation`
and `correlation_genes_tissues`, and directional plots in
`compareCancerProtein` for visualization. Package `ggrepel`(Slowikowski
K, 2024)’s function `geom_text_repel` was used in `outlier_detection` to
prevent overlapping labels.

Additionally BioRender(BioRender.com. BioRender \[Online\], accessed 2
November 2025), was used to generate the images used in the Overview
Section of the README.

ChatGPT was used across the functions to debug errors and to refine the
wording used in the roxygen tags. ChatGPT was also used to resolve the
errors that were caught during unit tests. Other than this, generative
AI was NOT used for core code/ideas/problem solving, and all other work
was done by the author.

## References

- BioRender.com. BioRender \[Online\]. Available at:
  <https://www.biorender.com> (accessed 2 November 2025).

- Cetinkaya-Rundel M,Cheng J, Grolemund G (2017).Customize your UI with
  HTML. <https://shiny.posit.co/r/articles/build/html-tags/>

- Chang W, Cheng J, Allaire J, Sievert C, Schloerke B, Aden-Buie G, Xie
  Y, Allen J, McPherson J, Dipert A, Borges B (2025). shiny: Web
  Application Framework for R. R package version 1.11.1,
  <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=shiny>

- Lonsdale, J., Thomas, J., Salvatore, M. et al. The Genotype-Tissue
  Expression (GTEx) project. Nat Genet 45, 580–585 (2013).
  <https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2653>

- Müller K, Wickham H (2025). tibble: Simple Data Frames. R package
  version 3.3.0, <https://tibble.tidyverse.org/>.

- OpenAI.(2025). ChatGPT (GPT-5) \[Large language model\]. Retrieved
  November 2, 2025, from <https://chatgpt.com/>

- R Core Team (2024). *R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
  Computing*. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
  <https://www.R-project.org/>.

- Silva, A., S. J. Rothstein, P. D. McNicholas, and S. Subedi (2019). A
  multivariate Poisson-log normal mixture model for clustering
  transcriptome sequencing data.BMC Bioinformatics. 2019;20(1):394.
  <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31311497/>

- Slowikowski K (2024). ggrepel: Automatically Position Non-Overlapping
  Text Labels with ‘ggplot2’.
  <https://ggrepel.slowkow.com/,https://github.com/slowkow/ggrepel>.

- Thul, P. J., & Lindskog, C. (2018). The human protein atlas: A spatial
  map of the human proteome. Protein science : a publication of the
  Protein Society, 27(1), 233–244. <https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.3307>

- Tran AN, Dussaq AM, Kennell Jr T, Willey CD, Hjelmeland AB (2019).
  “HPAanalyze: an R package that facilitates the retrieval and analysis
  of the Human Protein Atlas data.” MC Bioinformatics 20, 463 (2019).
  <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-3059-z>

- Warwick A, Zuckerman B, Ung C, Luben R, Olvera-Barrios A (2025).
  “gtexr: A convenient R interface to the Genotype-Tissue Expression
  (GTEx) Portal API.” Journal of Open Source Software, 10(109), 8249.
  ISSN 2475-9066, <doi:10.21105/joss.08249>, gigs v0.2.1.

- Wickham H (2016). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis.
  Springer-Verlag New York. ISBN 978-3 319-24277-4,
  <https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org>.

- Wickham H, François R, Henry L, Müller K, Vaughan D (2025). dplyr: A
  Grammar of Data Manipulation. R package version 1.1.4,
  <https://dplyr.tidyverse.org>.

- Wickham H, Henry L (2025). purrr: Functional Programming Tools. R
  package version 1.1.0, <https://purrr.tidyverse.org/>.

- Wickham H, Vaughan D, Girlich M (2025). tidyr: Tidy Messy Data. R
  package version 1.3.1, <https://tidyr.tidyverse.org>.

## Acknowledgements

This package was developed as part of an assessment for 2025 BCB410H:
Applied Bioinformatics course at the University of Toronto, Toronto,
CANADA. `ExprCompareR` welcomes issues, enhancement requests, and other
contributions. To submit an issue, use the GitHub issues.

## Other topics

- ExprCompareR analyzes two types of biological data: RNA-expression
  data and protein expression data. This data is queried from
  established databases, namely the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project
  (GTEx)(Lonsdale et al., 2013) and Human Protein Atlas (HPA)(Thul et
  al., 2018).

- The RNA-expression data from GTEx has been derived from GTEx healthy
  donors and measures the amount of mRNA produced by each gene in
  various tissues. This data is available in Transcripts Per Million
  (TPM), and organized in tabular form, where the rows depict the gene
  expression, while the columns are tissue type, gene name, gene
  expression, etc. (Lonsdale et al., 2013)

- The protein-expression data from Human Protein Atlas, has been derived
  from HPA healthy and diseases tissue samples, and measures the
  abundance of proteins in various tissues, and is organized in a
  tabular form, having columns such as gene, tissue, level, reliability
  etc. This has been measured by techniques like immunohistochemistry
  and mass spectrometry (Thul et al., 2018).

- ***LIMITATIONS***: As the transcriptomic data and proteomic data come
  from different sources and different individuals, technical and
  biological variation can cause limitations in our package. However,
  our package transforms and normalizes data to achieve a fair
  comparison.

- The targeted audience for `ExprCompareR` are bioinformatics
  researchers, computational scientists or even students who are
  interested in exploring the relationship between gene expression at
  RNA and protein levels. Specifically, this package is designed for
  users who are interested in finding candidates for
  post-transcriptional regulation or studying tissue-specific RNA and
  protein expression or even biomarker discovery. Additionally, as
  `ExprCompareR` provides statistical/correlation analysis of RNA-seq
  and protein expression data sets as well as visualization tools, it
  can cater to users who are interested in utilizing these aspects as
  well.

- On performing a thorough search in Bioconductor and CRAN there is not
  any package that is exploring and quantifying the relationship between
  RNA-seq and protein expression across tissues and conditions.

- ExprCompareR has the following assumptions:

  1.  Data Quality and reliability in public databases: We assume that
      the data collected by these renowned databases of HPA (Thul et
      al., 2018) and GTEx (Lonsdale et al., 2013), have followed the
      rules and regulations of data collection, and that there is little
      to known error/ bias.

  2.  Human genome limitation: We assume the user has provided genes and
      tissues found only in humans. Our package scope is limited to
      human genes and tissues. Hence the user can only use this package
      for human genes and tissues. Input from other species, will be
      considered invalid.

- ExprCompareR is a combination of two words: Expression and Compare as
  the package deals with comparing RNA-seq expression and protein
  expression data.

## Package Structure

The package tree structure is provided below.

``` r
- ExprCompareR
  |- ExprCompareR.Rproj
  |- DESCRIPTION
  |- NAMESPACE
  |- LICENSE
  |- NEWS
  |- README
  |- data
    |- cancer_tissue_map.rda
    |- gene_symbols_list.rda
    |- normal_tissue.rda
    |- tissue_list_RNA.rda
    |- tissue_list_protein.rda
    |- tissue_map.rda
  |- inst
    CITATION
    |- extdata
      |- ExprCompareR_Overview.png
    |- shiny-scripts 
        |- app.R
        |- modules
          |- module-cancer_protein.R
          |- module-compute_correlation.R
          |- module-correlation_genes_tissues.R
          |- module-outlier.R
  |- man
    |- ExprCompareR.Rd
    |- cancer_tissue_map.Rd
    |- compareCancerProtein.Rd
    |- compute_correlation.Rd
    |- convert_to_gtex.Rd
    |- correlation_genes_only.Rd
    |- correlation_genes_tissues.Rd
    |- correlation_tissues_only.Rd
    |- detect_outliers.Rd
    |- gene_symbols_list.Rd
    |- get_gtex_gencode_ids.Rd
    |- normal_tissue.Rd
    |- pathology.Rd
    |- per_gene_plot.Rd
    |- per_tissue_plot.Rd
    |- protein_expr_values.Rd
    |- runExprCompareR.Rd
    |- tissue_list_RNA.Rd
    |- tissue_list_protein.Rd
    |- tissue_map.Rd
  |- R
    |- data.R
    |- ExprCompareR.R
    |- Helpers.R
    |- Outlier_Detection.R
    |- runExprCompareR.R
    |- Correlation.R
    |- CancerProtein.R
  |- vignettes
    |- Introduction_TestPackage.rmd
    |- images
      |- both_per_gene.png
      |- both_per_tissue.png
      |- outlier_detection.png
      |- pathology.png
      |- per_gene_only.png
      |- per_tissue_only.png
      |- ExprCompareR_Overview.png
  |- tests
    |- testthat.R
    |- testthat
      |- test-helpers.R
      |- test-outlier.R
      |- test-correlation.R
      |- test-cancer-protein.R
```
